The Dose Effect by TJ Power. It is by far one of the best books I've ever read. Because this book is an action-oriented book and it gives you specific actions that you can try out on a daily basis. It makes a strong case that the modern world has hacked our brains into being less productive, especially for those who have involuntarily become vulnerable to the information that is exposed to them, which demotivates them and makes them unconfident in their daily lives. Including those people who believe that there are factors around that happen in the world that are affecting their ability to contribute. The book talks about the four main chemicals in the brain: dopamine, oxytocin, serotonin, and endorphins and compares how it was 200 years ago or even earlier and then puts in perspective how it is now and provides guided targeted actions to overcome these factors.

Summary of the chapter dopamine:
Principles of dopamine:
1. The job of dopamine is to make hard work feel good. I would stress to say at this point that it is also very important to have a goal in mind (something that you desire) for dopamine to be released. And it is even more important that when the job is completed, to reaffirm that you are getting closer to your goal. An example would be "I have to work hard on this task so that I will get my promotion. And this will definitely make me happy." For dopamine to be released, you have to believe that what you're doing (the task) will genuinely help you in whatever goals you have to ultimately be happy (the reason why everyone wants anything).
2. He talks about controlling the pain-pleasure balance, which basically states that the parts of the brain responsible for pain and pleasure are co-located, which makes triggering one of them manually makes the other part of the brain activate to 'balance it out'. That is, forcefully performing an activity that will cause you pain, such as pushing yourself in the gym or working hard overtime will give you the feeling of pleasure after (provided you genuinely feel you are getting closer to your goal and you don't feel like you're getting nowhere, if you feel like you're getting nowhere, that's burnout - meaning you believe that the path you're taking isn't going to give you the things that you want + genuine lack of Serotonin). Likewise, unconsciously taking part in activities that give you too much pleasure without enough work on them will make your brain trigger pain in response so that you will change your behavior. Your brain will release dynorphin when you do high-dopamine activities, which gives you a feeling of low mood, depression, and not wanting to do anything. (After watching hours of social media). 

The book lists the six causes of main low dopamine: sugary foods, alcohol, and drugs; pornography; social media; gambling; and online shopping. It makes the case that because you are working hard and manually pushing yourself through feelings of pain, your brain will release dopamine slowly throughout the day. Giving you more motivation to work. And it will not drop down because you have already pushed yourself through feelings of pain. However, when you indulge in activities that involve little to no effort but give you a lot of dopamine (such as scrolling through social media or watching porn), your brain triggers homeostasis by making you get feelings of pain. This is because your brain knows that scrolling through hours of social media or doing unproductive things will not make you do well in life. However, it's also important to note that in the modern world, the activities that we've involuntarily engaged in (any activity that gives us too many feelings of reward without enough hard work towards it, could be a snack we see at a supermarket which we've tried once and love it, could be pornography, could be Reels), have hacked our brains so much because of the dopamine spikes it gives us, that some people would be willing to risk the most of their lives just for the kick. In other words, it narrows down progressively the things that they like. Which is the definition of addiction. As a result of this plus the brain wanting to achieve homeostasis you will feel demotivated and depressed - your brain wants deep rest from the character you are playing by doing unproductive work - Jim Carrey (more or less). You will also feel distracted because of the high spikes of dopamine that you get by these distractions (capitalized on those with weak Dopamine Control Circuits - ADHD people) The author aims to do the opposite, where you progressively widen the things that you like by eliminating the unwanted aspects of modern technology. 

The author gives a glimpse of how high dopamine levels would feel like. And he says that a highly dopaminergic person would always feel energetic, excited, and very productive. And he will achieve far more than what is achieved by normal people because he knows that achieving the activities that he achieves are good for his life to get to a better position. In the book, it also briefly mentions the willpower and how important it is to develop the anterior mid-cingulate cortex. It says, with each activity of resisting addictive behavior or intentionally performing a healthy behavior, this part of the brain gets a rep in its gym. The stronger the AMCC is, the more disciplined the person will be, and the more likelihood of his success.


The next part of the chapter is when the book discusses the five actions that people should do to increase their dopamine.
Action number 1: Enter Flow State. This is the state of mind that is achieved when a person doing a task forgets everything around him and then just focuses on the task. The person is able to observe more than normal levels of information and is able to process and produce at a faster rate. The book makes a strong case that with a stronger AMC, the capacity of a person to enter the flow state increases, and it gives techniques on achieving the flow state. Examples of when flow state can be achieved are when reading, playing guitar, working, coding, or problem-solving. The four steps of achieving flow status.
1. Select the task - one that is challenging to achieve within a certain time frame but it is achievable. It stresses that dopamine is built through effort. The harder the task, the more effort is required, therefore the more dopamine is released. It highly recommends picking up a hard task at the start of the day so that the dopamine release increases throughout the rest of the day.
2. Tell someone - accountability partner
3. Eliminate the distractions. This could be a Teams message, an email, social media, or any app. Once you've selected your task, you must close all other things and ensure that you're only focused on the task in front of you.
4. The stopwatch challenge. The author's states "The start of the task is the hardest." The author states that to achieve any task, you must pass 15 minutes of focus. The author says before starting any test you you start the stopwatch and then see for how long you've been focusing hard the first time you get distracted.
The other says the goal is to increase the stock watch counter from 15 minutes to 30 minutes to 1 hour and so on.

The author mentions about the connection between dopamine and ADHD. He said that people with ADHD have low baseline dopamine levels, 
meaning they They easily get carried away by quick dopamine activities because they give them greater highs. 
It's like giving a poor person a day in a luxurious mansion. 
Any cues that indicate he might have another day at the luxurious mansion will get his attention off as opposed to any other normal work that might actually get him a better life.

The author stresses the activities to do if you have symptoms of ADHD.  1. Having a structured morning routine (with bed making and getting sun). 2. Exercising as much as you can, especially before a hard task. 3. Reducing quick dopamine foods, especially in the morning. 4. Reducing any time on Reels. 
The author also stresses that people with ADHD need to find something that they love, as it can also work as a benefit to them - where they are able to excel at things that they love more than other people because they get more dopamine rises than other people (because of their lower baseline dopamine).

Action number 2: Discipline. TLDR: Clean your bed, clean your house, clean your workspace, and organize them. Make your bed every morning. Never skip doing your dishes. It's highly important that when you complete these tasks, if you don't feel a sense of accomplishment, you have to reiterate to yourself that doing these things will indirectly help you achieve your goals by setting the systems right (in most cases, this would be correct). 
Action number 3: Phone fasting: The main culprit. 
The author warns about over-consuming phones and he says that we need to actively practice phone fasting to replenish dopamine in our brains.  
Stage 1: Phone Fasting. The authors suggest that the people have at least specific times of the day in which their phone is not near them. 
The other mentions that when we sleep, our dopamine is regenerated in our brain.  
The other mentions when we do a task that requires effort in the morning, our dopamine levels will begin to rise. 
However, if we involve ourselves in activities with phones (with notifications) and quick dopamine hits from social media, our dopamine levels are going to spike and crash out. 
The author points to an interesting research that says that our first source of dopamine drives our activities throughout the rest of the day. Considering this, the author suggests that the first activity of the day could be reading after making the bed and getting the sun, as that sets the direction for the rest of the day. 
The author suggests combining it with cold showers, washing your face, and brushing your teeth immediately. Anything that gives you a feeling of accomplishment.
The authors rule 'I must see sunlight before I see social media'. In the evenings, the author recommends exercising, eating, socialising with friends and even watching TV just so that you can get away from your phone. 
Stage 2: Phone setup. This is a chapter where I set up once and never looked back. Set up Screen Time as a widget and make it display on the home screen.  Make sure all notifications for other than important apps are off.  I personally have it such that other than family, almost all notifications are off. No fucking app pings me and makes me buy stuff (as someone who finds it hard to control addictions, fucking Uber eats reminding me "hey, im right here". Fuck you Ubereats and your UberOne). Fuck you Instagram. Move those bastards to a side of the screen that's harder to reach.
If people can't really use these apps, the author suggests his social media moments. He gives three times in the day where he can scroll through social media guilt-free. According to him, he has rules before he does it. He makes sure that it's not the first thing in the morning, and the first thing in the morning is making up his bed. He makes sure that he doesn't spend all of his lunchtime scrolling, he also makes sure that he exercises before he scrolls, and he makes sure that he's eaten food and cleaned up before he goes on social media.  
Another stress is having an accountability partner for doing this challenge as it increases the chances of success For phone fasting.

Action number 4: Cold Shower. TLDR - take cold showers in the morning. Gradually build up from 20 seconds to minutes. You dont have to go ice cold But cold enough to trigger a feeling of pain in your brain. Guess what happens when you forcefully trigger feelings of pain in your brain? If you can't tell it by now, then read this page again. The book points to interesting research that says that the baseline dopamine levels when taking cold showers are raised by 2.5 times their normal level, which matches the same level of dopamine when a person takes cocaine. Please note do not take cold showers when you are sick or when you have feelings of flu. If you have some underlying condition, please speak to your GP first. Taking cold showers trains your brain to do challenging tasks that it doesn't want to do in the first place. Pro tip: Go headfirst into the cold shower, then you'll be just fine. Never start with your body first. Turn on some crazy music that gets you goosebumps so that you will pass by just fine. 
Action number 5: Your pursuit. Your pursuit. This chapter forces the user to think about what they want in life and what they're willing to sacrifice to get it. The other stress is that it's important to have a desire in your life, as that is a true function of dopamine. It is designed to keep you alive by making you engage in activities that increase your survival. If you don't have any desire, it basically leads to a drop in dopamine, which can lead to depression, demotivation.
Things to pursue: 1. Your career (certain project to be finished?). 2. Your health (certain health goals? Dopamine can play a key role in your body health, although other factors are involved as well). 3. Your relationships (eg., I want to spend 30 mins a day with my parents/partner so we both will be happy). 4. Creativity (your hobbies, without phones!) The more you use your creative part of the brain the better it becomes.
 5. Your finances (AI suggested this haha). 6. Reading the DOSE effect (authors promo haha)

The author concludes by saying that you are in the Driving seat of your life. It is up to you whether to pursue quick dopamine hits too regularly and then feel lazy and depressed and not motivated.  Or prioritize the dopamine actions and watch the dopamine levels rise as you achieve more and more. 
The author Recommends picking one of the actions and Doing the challenges that he mentions in his book for those actions. 